
This README file describes the design and idea behind the loadable module
code for XFree86. This code is based of code that was developed by Metro Link 
and donated to The XFree86 Project.

<at this point we should include the design document as written by Stuart>

At this point (XFree86-3.2Ad) the code works for a few cards that were
tested, all this was done under Linux. Significant cleanups and improvements
will be necessary together with alot of testing. Ideally, based on this
technology a new server design should be developed.

Debugging this code is somewhat dificult as gdb will not be able to step
through loaded modules in source mode. The functions

LoaderPrintSymbol( address )
LoaderPrintAddress( symbol )

are provided to allow easy orientation in the loaded module. Most problems
stem from global functions and variables that are not exported from other
modules or the main server executable, but are referenced in a module.
All global variables should be put in ScreenPrivates or other container
objects, that are driver specific. This will solve the biggest problem
cleanly and at the same time provide an important step towards multi headed
servers.

More documentation on the design and implementation should be added here.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Here are the changes that were made to this design and to the generic XFree86
code after the initial merger of the code:

18. resolve unresolved function to a dummy function that prints out
    a fatal error when called. Only for Elf at this point
18. fix autoloading amd implement it for all SVGA drivers
17. add loading for the new s3/svga driver and the S3V server 
16. update patches to XFree86-3.2Ac
16. update patches to X11R6.3 (XFree86-3.2o)
15. add automagic loading of the right xaa and cfb libraries (only matrox)
14. some color depth dependencies in livga256 and xaa have been removed
13. implicit loading of some modules has been implemented
12. all SVGA drivers are loadable now
11. changed vgaDrivers to be built dynamically
10. added <name>ModuleInit interface that is called when the module named
    name.o or name.a or name.so or... is loaded
 9. disabled external clock program for now
 8. LD-3 released
 7. ported LD-2 back to Linux and sorted out the problems related to
    undefined symbols
 6. LD-2 released
 5. added the necessary symbols to get S3, XAA, Matrox working
 4. changed config code to load the modules given in the XF86Config file
 3. changed vgaIOBase and friends to be globals living in the main server
 2. changed the S3 specific calls in the RAMDAC routines to be function ptrs
 1. added Imakefile support to build and install the modules

Specific comments to some design ideas and the state of the code

- Init Function

every module has its init function, which has the name <name(module)>ModuleInit.
When loading the module this function is repeatedly called with two pointers
(one to a magic value, one to a data element) until it returns a magic value
indicating that it is done. Currently the magic values support several
actions:

magic				data points to

MAGIC_ADD_VIDEO_CHIP_REC	the videoChipRec to be added to the list
				of drivers

MAGIC_LOAD			the name of the module to load

MAGIC_CCD_DO_BITBLT		the do_bitblt function for the current
				color depth

MAGIC_CCD_SCREEN_PRIV_IDX	the ScreenPrivIdx for the current color depth

MAGIC_CCD_XAA_SCREEN_INIT	the XaaScreenInit function for the current
				color depth

MAGIC_DONE			nothing; side effect is to stop looping

- mixed color depths

the current code has various cross dependencies on cfb8, libvga256, and all
higher depths cfbs as well as all the xaa modules. These need to be
straightened out (this has been started in change #14 above but is far from
done).
We basically need a redesigned server to solve these issues cleanly.

- unresolved functions

the current code has one 'minor' flaw. When checking unresolved symbols
we reference quite a few things from the cfb libraries that we did not
pull in. Since these functions are never called, this doesn't really
matter, but it is uggly, obviously.

Changing all this to use function pointers and initializing all of
them sounds like the clean solution, but I'm wondering if it wasn't
better to define a default function that is bound to all unresolved
symbols and prints out that there was a problem with resolving symbols
and makes the server exit gracefully. This would be a reasonable
default behaviour and would allow to keep dangling references to
functions that are known not to be called.

This "elegant hack" has been implemented for the Elf loader, but better
solutions are welcome.

- OS support

Currently this has been tested on Linux, it should work on SVR4. This
code needs to be ported to the other operating systems XFree86 supports.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated Feb 14, 1997, Dirk H. Hohndel <hohndel@XFree86.Org>




$XFree86 xc/programs/Xserver/hw/xfree86/loader/README,v $
