$XFree86: xc/programs/xedit/lisp/README,v 1.8 2002/02/12 16:07:54 paulo Exp $

LAST UPDATED:	$Date$


    SUMMARY

  This is a small lisp interpreter for xedit. In the current implementation,
it is just reading from stdin and writing to stdout/stderr. The code in xedit
just wraps these and read/write from a pipe to the lisp interpreter. This
is expected to change at some time, so that it should be possible to manage
the xedit text buffers from lisp code.

  It has a very simple method for loading shared modules, slightly based on
the XFree86 loader code, that is currently disabled by default. To enable it,
edit lisp.cf and change BuildSharedLispModules to YES.

  Assuming you have built it with BuildSharedLispModules enabled, you can build
a small test application can be built in this directory running "make lsp".
Two lisp programs are available in the test directory. To test the programs
run "./lsp test/hello.lsp" or "./lsp test/widgets.lsp".

  Currently, it should be used as an helper and/or a small calculator embedded
in xedit. For the future it should be possible to write entire interfaces
in the xedit text buffers. The code is expected to be very stable, and by
using it, xedit should not crash in any way (actually, it can't, as the
lisp is running in a separate process). The lisp process is started once the
first eval is called.


    USAGE SUMMARY

  To evaluate lisp expressions, put the text cursor just after the
lisp expression and press:
C-x,C-e	- will evaluate it, and print the result to the message window
C-j	- will evaluate it, and print the result to the edit window, any
	  errors are printed to the message window.
C-g	- will send an SIGINT to the lisp process, and that process will
	  stop whatever it was processing and jump to the toplevel,
	  to wait for more input.

Note that C-j currently will only work in the *scratch* buffer.


    IMPLEMENTATION SUMMARY

  The interpreter is expected to be a subset of Common Lisp, and is not
expected to invent any new features or interfaces, just become more and
more compatible with Common Lisp. The only non Common Lisp features, currently
is/are:

  o It has some Emacs Lisp functions, that should be removed and replaced with
    the Common Lisp equivalent ones.


    WHY?

  I have used Emacs for a long time, and since I was working as volunteer to
make of Xaw a better user interface, xedit seemed to need some work. For at
least 3 years now, I don't use any other text editor than xedit, unless I
need for some reason to work on the text console.


    DEBUGGER

  There is a, currently, very simple debugger implement in the interpreter.
The debugger is now optional, and off by default. To make it available,
you need to recompile with -DDEBUGGER.
To use the debugger, run the lsp sample program as "./lsp -d", and optionally
pass a second parameter, for the file to be interpreted. Once the debugger
prompt is visible, type "help" for a summary of options. To leave the debugger
type "continue".
  Note that the debugger is still very simple, it won't work from xedit, and
won't drop to the debugger on "fatal errors". It allows adding breakpoints to
functions and watchpoints to variables. Support for changing data and going to
the debugger on fatal errors should be added at some time.


    STRUCTURE IMPLEMENTATION OVERVIEW

    Assuming structure person is created as:
	(defstruct person age first-name last-name)
    The interpreter will gc protect the arguments in the list DEF defined as
	(person age first-name last-name), and create the special atoms:
	make-person	  with structure property DEF function STRUCT_CONSTRUCTOR
	person-p	  with structure property DEF function STRUCT_CHECK
	person-age	  with structure property DEF function 0
	person-first-name with structure property DEF function 1
	person-last-name  with structure property DEF function 2
    When an accessor function is called, as in:
	(person-age (make-person :age 30))
    The evaluator will internally translate the code to:
	(xedit::struct-access 'person-age (xedit::make-struct 'make-person :age 30))
    The function xedit::struct-access will fetch the structure property
from the atom person-age to determine the offset, and also make sure it's
argument is of type person. The function xedit::make-struct only checks that
the structure property is set to the atom person, and that the age field is
a person field name.
    It is possible to override the setf method for structures, but a suitable
one is constructed, for example:
	(setf (person-first-name some-person) 'MARIA)
    Internally, it will be evaluated as this definition where provided:
	(defsetf person-first-name (struct) (value)
	    `(xedit::struct-store 'person-first-name ,struct ,value))
    And the code executed is:
	(xedit::struct-store 'person-first-name some-person 'MARIA)
    Type checking is also done with a single function, as the code:
	(person-p some-person)
    Is internally translated to:
	(xedit::struct-type 'person-p some-person)
    The current structure implementation, like almost everything in the
interpreter is very simple, and calling any of the xedit::* functions
explicitly is unsupported.
    Structure redefinition is supported, but not encouraged, and you should
do it only when sure no instances of the previous definition exists, previous
access method functions are only removed if the new definition has a field
with the same name, and calling the new methods on old objects will generate
errors.


    COMPILER

  Now there is a very simple bytecode compiler. It is far from finished, but
for simple code can show significant better performance.
  There is not yet an interface to compile entire files and no interface to
store the generated bytecode in disk. There is an interface to bytecode
compile toplevel forms as a LAMBDA NIL, but it is not yet exported.
  If your code needs to call GO/RETURN/RETURN-FROM as the result of an EVAL,
it must jump to code in the interpreter, after compiling all calls to
GO/RETURN/RETURN-FROM are just stack adjusting and jumps in the bytecode.
CATCH/THROW and UNWIND-PROTECT are running as interpreted code for now, so it
is safe to use these, but code in such blocks is not compiled/optimized
(not even macro expansion is done, as it understands that while not compiled,
everything is candidate to redefinition at any time).
  To compile the code, just write a function, and compile it, example:

	(defun fact (n)
	    (if (< n 2)
		1
		(* n (fact (1- n)))
	    )
	)
	FACT

	(compile 'fact)
	FACT
	NIL
	NIL

	(disassemble 'fact)
	Function FACT:
	1 required argument: N
	0 optional arguments
	0 keyword parameters
	No rest argument

	Bytecode header:
	1 element used in the stack
	2 elements used in the builtin stack
	0 elements used in the protected stack
	Constant 0 = 1
	Constant 1 = (2)
	Symbol 0 = N
	Builtin 0 = *
	Builtin 1 = 1-
	Builtin 2 = <

	Initial stack:
	0 = N

	Bytecode stream:
	   0  NOOP
	   1  LOAD&PUSH (0)
	   4  NOOP
	   5  LOADCON&PUSH [1]	    ;  (2)
	   8  CALL 2 [2]	    ;  <
	  12  NOOP2
	  15  JUMPNIL 17
	  20  NOOP
	  21  LOADCON [0]	    ;  1
	  24  NOOP2
	  27  JUMP 31
	  32  NOOP
	  33  LOAD&PUSH (0)
	  36  NOOP
	  37  LOAD&PUSH (0)
	  40  CALL 1 [1]	    ;  1-
	  44  NOOP
	  45  LET* [0]		    ;  N
	  48  LETREC 1
	  50  NOOP
	  51  UNLET 1
	  54  BCONS1
	  55  CALL 1 [0]	    ;  *
	  59  RETURN
	FACT

  There are several optimizations that should be done at some time, I don't
think adding NOOP opcodes will help everywhere to make aligned memory reads
of shorts and ints.
  It should have explicitly visible registers, not the abstraction of "the
current value", so the code generator can choose register allocation for
loop control variables, commonly used variables, etc, for example. Jumps
should have 3 types: byte relative, 2 bytes relative and 4 bytes relative.
For now there is only sizeof(int) byte relative jumps, byte relative jumps
can show a significant performance increase, but they are disable until
it is decided how inlined functions will work, if it just updates the bytecode
header and cut&past the bytecode, jumps must be updated, and some jumps
may not fit anymore in a byte.


    OPTIMIZATION

  There are plenty of possibilities to make the interpreter run faster. Some
optimizations that can make it run quite faster in certain cases are:
  o Storing objects that fits in sizeof(void*) - 1 in place. In a 32
    bit computer, it means that all integers in the range +- 2^23,
    more if less than one byte is used as the "object header", can be stored
    in the pointer itself, so, if you do a loop that iterates several
    million times, instead of allocating and gc collecting several million
    objects, 0 objects will be gc collected.
    This is significantly easy to implement, but needs rewriting several
    functions of the interpreter, as a lot of code assumes it can just
    change an object type (as all of them have the same size currently).
  o Better object memory layout and gc. It is not very smart to traverse
    all list/vector elements to mark the objects, should only need to
    mark the first element of a list/vector.
    The current memory allocation code is very bad also, it try to keep
    3 times more free objects than the currently used number, this can
    consume a lot of memory. The reason is to reduce the gc time cost
    so that it will in average miss only one in every 4 collect tries.
  o Implement real vectors, currently they are just a list, so it cannot
    just deference a given index, and gc time is very long also.
  o Most lists are never changed once created, it could somehow add an index
    field in the cons cell, so that NTH/NTHCDR/LENGTH like code could just
    deference the correct object, instead of traversing the CDR of every
    cons. This would probably require implementing lists as vectors, while
    making it easy to deference would make life harder when deleting/inserting
    sublists in a list. It should also better be done in a way that does
    not require a lot of objects allocated linearly.


    HELPING

  Send comments and code to me (paulo@XFree86.Org) or to the XFree86
mailing/patch lists.

--
Paulo
