$XFree86: xc/programs/xedit/lisp/TODO,v 1.3 2002/02/08 02:59:26 paulo Exp $

LAST UPDATED:	$Date: 2002/10/06 17:11:40 $

  Small todo list

o Forgive about the possibility of more than one instance of the lisp
  interpreter in the same application. Have just one instance of the
  LispMac structure, to avoid name clashes.
o When an Init function is present in every file, call LispAddBuiltin from
  that initialization function.
o Cleanup the code, make it optional to build some uncommon features (as well
  as the entire interpreter?). Implement more functions directly in lisp.
o Finish an "specification" for loadable modules. Write a FFI interface.
  Without the possibility of using already existing libraries, the interpreter
  won't be too much useful due to a poor library. It is very desirable to
  "auto-generate" directly from C header files the interface to the lisp
  code, and from that, dlload a shared library. In some cases, it is required
  to link statically with a new interpreter binary, make it easy.
o Implement a better string type. That should support characters larger than
  8 bits, and that should allow embeded nuls.
o Implement a richer set of math functions. This, if properly done can be
  made a loadable module.
o Optmize mathimp.c, comparing a double with a bignum should never cause an
  error. Implement mp?_initsetXXX functions?
o Finish missing features in read.c, and simplify it.
o (close) probably should not send a signal when closing a pipe.
o Implement "real" vectors, they exist to make access to field elements
  at constant time, implementing vectors as lists may be very slow.
o Use float and double as floating points formats.
o Implement support for vectors of "atomic" types. Vectors of floats would
  be useful for example if a OpenGL binding is done.
o Implement a multiple precision floating point format. Either a 128 bits
  (or configurable length?) IEEE 754 like number, or some format using
  ratios, a epsilon for rouding, rounding modes, exact/inexact flag, a good
  amount of guard digits, etc.
o Write more functions and optimization for bignums. Try to make the code
  as reusable as possible, either by other software or at least by the
  different number types.
o Instead of using mathimp.c for a large amount of functions, implement a
  "generic number" type and implement the calculations directly in the
  mp library.
o Finish the interface/protocol with xedit. It is taking a bit long to have
  have programable text buffers, easily implementable color-syntax modes, etc.
o Make more optimizations to get faster execution. Implement byte-code
  compilation? Implement a simple optimizer, not very effective for common
  code, but almost mandatory for loops.
o Add more missing Common Lisp features, like &allow-other-keys for function
  definitions, the missing structure features, CLOS etc.
o Fix the Postgresql module, make it compile everywhere.
o Readd support for gmp as the math library. This must be optional, gmp is
  not present in all systems.
o Add support for multi-threaded applications?
o Make it possible to know if a object has only one reference, this is
  required to make "inplace" changes of variables. Very useful for things
  like (incf) and (decf), and also when dealing with bignums.
o Maybe have a freelist for objects depending on the type. Bignums can be
  reused, and having some large ones expecting to be freed by the gc can
  consume a lot of memory.
o Internationalization. Support ',' in floats? Correctly treat characters
  for {up,down}-casing.
o Synch the Xaw text code for supporting tables, text alignment/paragraphs,
  etc, and add bindings to the interpreter. Add support for incremental
  changes of those properties, currently it is "read-only".
o Write some type of "hyperlinks", this is the only feature missing to even
  allow writting a web browser inside xedit.
o Write some "demos" (maybe a file manager or a simple mail reader) using the
  Xt/Xaw bindings (needs modules working in all systems).
o Remove all calls to the macros GCProtect and GCUProtect. This is unsafe
  and should be removed.
o Write a set of tests. The interpreter is expected to be only a subset of
  Common Lisp, but what it understand should generate the expected/acceptable
  results. Probably there are yet errors in the math code.
