MGA Millennium (MGA2064W) with Ti3026 RAMDAC driver v1.0

NOTE: This driver is pretty new, and not everything works like you expect
it to. It shouldn't crash your machine, but you may have video artifacts
or missing lines. Please report any and all problems to XFree86@Xfree86.org
using the appropiate bug report sheet. 

Check the file called BUGS to see if a problem you have is already found. If
not please report it to xfree86@xfree86.org with the subject line "bug in mga
driver" so it gets to us quickly. 

To keep your driver upto date: keep applying any post XFree86 v3.2 patches
XFree86 publish via ftp.xfree86.org, or if you feel a little daring, try to 
use the patches from the web site below.

Features:

* Basic support for the Matrox Millennium video adapter
* uses linear frame buffer whenever possible
* it should be possible to reach resolutions upto 1920x1024
* it should be possible to use pixel depths of 8, 16, 24, and 32 bits
  per pixel (256 pseudo colour, "high colour", "packed true colour",
  "true colour"). 
* has the following accelerations:
  - lines
  - some bitblts
  - filled rectangles

Future Features (in order from highest to lowest priority)

=1	more hardware acceleration (hw cursor, more primitive operations, etc)
=1	3d acceleration (once we work out how that's done)
2	more chipsets and RAMDACs

Technical Note:

This driver is the work of Radoslaw Kapitan for the most part, when he did
not have the required Matrox documentation. The driver has been cleaned up
and corrected, and should work on most Matrox Millennium boards.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
This first release that was integrated in XFree86-3.1.2Gg contains
several hacks to get this to work. Especially, it won't work when the
MMIO registers aren't mapped correctly. Most of the updated PCI
detection and access code should at least be rethought.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Reference releases, which are quality tested and are known to work are in
the base XFree86 3.2 and later source tree. If you don't like your machine
crashing, we suggest you stick to those stable releases.

Hardware Supported:

This driver only supports the MGA Storm (MGA2064W) chipset with the TI
(TVP) 3026 RAMDAC. Matrox have only so far made 175 and 220 MHz boards with
these two components, although 135 and 250 MHz RAMDAC parts exist.

This driver autodetects WRAM size and RAMDAC speed, so you don't need to 
probe for clocks, or bother putting in a video ram size. 

We will eventually provide support for the other Matrox chipsets (once the
Millenium driver is at a far enough stage and more people with other cards
join the effort), including the Impression, Mystique, etc. 

At the moment, however, only the Millennium is supported.

Configuration:

* autodetects WRAM size and RAMDAC speed. Do not bother putting these in
  your "Device" section, as they will be overridden.

Other options:

*** nolinear doesn't currently work
"nolinear"		- disables linear frame buffer and BitBlt Engine

"noaccel", "no_bitblt"	- turns off BitBlt Engine

Virtual Widths:

*** The driver now should take care of the virtual/display width handling
The following multiples must be honored for virtual widths to work:

bpp		non-interleave	interleave
8		64				128
16		32				64
32		32				32

This table may be wrong - another table in the documentation has these
values the other way around, and the last row reads 32 16 32. Go figure!

2 MB boards have to use non-interleaved WRAM accesses for technical
reasons, but 4 and 8 MB WRAM configurations should be using interleaved
accesses for faster throughput. 4 MB boards can work in both interleaved
and non-interleaved modes. We will work out how to determine this in
future releases. 

For now, stick to nice virtual widths, like 640 800 1024 1152 1280 and so
on. If you can divide your proposed virtual width by 128, you'll be safe.

Main author:

Radoslaw Kapitan, Tarnow, Poland
kapitan@student.uci.agh.edu.pl

Code, Additions and Testing:

Andrew Vanderstock, Melbourne, Australia
vanderaj@mail2.svhm.org.au

Angsar

Michael Will

Andrew Mileski

Stephen Pitts
pitts2@...

Porting to XFree86-3.1.2Gg:

Dirk Hohndel
hohndel@XFree86.Org

Visit the Matrox Millennium XServer for XFree86 Home Page:
http://www.bf.rmit.edu.au/~ajv/xf86-matrox.html
to keep upto date with the latest news, new sources, etc.

