This directory contains encoding data for encodings that are not
hard-wired into the font system.  This is implemented for all three
scalable backends -- Type 1, Speedo, and TrueType.


1. Using encoding definition files

In order to use a font in an encoding that the font backend does not
know about, you need to have a `encodings.dir' file in the same
directory as the font file used.  `encodings.dir' has the same format
as `fonts.dir'.  Its first line specifies the number of encodings,
while every successive line has two columns, the name of the encoding,
and the name of the encoding file.  Every encoding name should
agree with the encoding name defined in the encoding file.  For
example,

  3
  mulearabic-0 mulearabic-0.enc
  mulearabic-1 mulearabic-1.enc
  mulearabic-2 mulearabic-2.enc

Note that the name of an encoding *must* be specified in the encoding
file's STARTENCODING or ALIAS line.  It is not enough to create an
`encodings.dir' entry.

If your platform supports it, encoding files may be compressed or
gzipped.


2. Encoding file format

The encoding files are `free form', /i.e./ any string of whitespace is
equivalent to a single space.  Keywords are parsed in a
non-case-sensitive manner, meaning that `size', `SIZE', and `SiZE' all
parse as the same keyword; on the other hand, case is significant in
glyph names.

Numbers can be written in decimal, as in `256', in hexadecimal, as in
`0x100', or in octal, as in `0400'.

Comments are introduced by a hash sign `#'.  All characters following
the `#' are ignored, up to the end of the line.

The encoding file starts with the definition of the name of the
encoding, and eventually its alternate names (aliases):

  STARTENCODING mulearabic-0
  ALIAS arabic-0
  ALIAS something-else

The names of the encoding should be suitable for use in an XLFD font
name, and thus contain exactly one dash `-'.

It may then optionally declare the size of the encoding

  SIZE 0x2B

Codes equal or larger than the size are taken to be undefined.  The
size defaults to 256 (0x100).  This means that you must declare the
size of all 16 bit encodings.

What follows is zero, one, or more mapping sections.  A mapping
section starts with a `STARTMAPPING' line stating the target of the
mapping.  The target may be one of:

* ISO 10646 (Unicode)

  STARTMAPPING unicode

* a given TrueType `cmap':

  STARTMAPPING cmap 3 1

* PostScript glyph names

  STARTMAPPING postscript

Every line in a mapping section maps one code.  In Unicode and
TrueType mappings, codes map to codes:

  0x21 0x0660
  0x22 0x0661
  ...

and codes not listed assumed to map through the identity (/i.e./ to the
same numerical value).  In order to override this default mapping, you
may specify a range of codes to be undefined by using an `UNDEFINE'
line:

  UNDEFINE 0x00 0x2A

or, for a single code

  UNDEFINE 0x1234

This works because later values override earlier one.

PostScript mappings are different.  Every line in a PostScript mapping
maps a code to a glyph name

  0x41 A
  0x42 B
  ...

and codes not explicitly listed are undefined.

A mapping section ends with an ENDMAPPING line

  ENDMAPPING

After all the mappings have been defined, the file ends with an
ENDENCODING line

  ENDENCODING

Lines of the form

  UNASSIGNED 0x00 0x1F

or

  UNASSIGNED 0x1234

are ignored by the server, but may be used by supporting utilities.

In order to make future extensions to the format possible, lines
starting with an unknown keyword are ignored, as are mapping sections
with an unknown target.


3. Backend specific notes

3.1 Type 1

The Type 1 backend first searches for a mapping with a target of
PostScript.  If one is found, it is used.  If none is found, the
backend searches for a mapping with target Unicode, which is then
composed with a builtin table mapping codes to glyph names.  Note that
this table only covers part of the Unicode codepoints that have been
assigned names by Adobe.

If neither a PostScript or Unicode mapping is found, the backend
defaults to ISO 8859-1.

Specifying an encoding value of `adobe-fontspecific' disables the
encoding mechanism.  This is useful with symbol and strangely encoded
fonts.

The Type 1 backend currently limits all encodings to 256 codes.

3.2 Speedo

The Speedo backend searches for a mapping with a target of Unicode,
and uses it if found.  If none is found, the backend defaults to 
ISO 8859-1.

The Speedo backend limits all encodings to 256 codes.

3.3 TrueType

The TrueType backend scans the mappings in order.  Mappings with
a target of PostScript are ignored; mappings with a TrueType or
Unicode target are checked against all the cmaps in the file.  The
first applicable mapping is used.


                                        Juliusz Chroboczek
                                        <jec@dcs.ed.ac.uk>
